OK.
So hello everyone, I wish you all the best
for this new semester and the new year. So.
The way I present my slide
is that I use a pen.
On top of this slide so.
I hope it helps you to
understand the topics better.
So this is the image took by a Hubble
telescope deep into the universe,
and you can find more details
about this in this URL.
And there are some few.
I mean, some reasons behind these slides.
I will explain why,
but before I explain I just wanted to show
you how deep this image was in the sky.
So this is the point of view from the Earth.
And you see how deep the how powerful
this telescope is and how deep it can
go to the universe, and to take this.
I mean colorful image of the stars.
So the reason the first reason is that up.
The science of astronomy is
not about building telescope,
so we already know that. However,
if we have a I mean powerful telescope.
If we have, I mean Mechanical Engineers.
I mean scientists in physics and etc.
Put all these theories to
build this powerful telescope.
It's a huge advantage to the
astronomers to prove their theories
to study the universe and the stars.
This very similar actually topic is
going to happen for computer science.
In computer science, we are not going.
I mean the main reason behind the computer
science is not building computer systems,
but we know that if we.
Can build the powerful computers.
It's a huge.
I mean benefit for computer
scientists to run their algorithm
more efficiently and effectively.
So as you can see, this is a famous code by.
Edsger Dijkstra.
Actually, he says that he's
a famous computer scientist.
He says that computer science is more
about is no more about building computers.
Very similar to astronomy is
about telescopes, so.
By these by this code and also by.
This analogy between astronomy
and computer science.
We could say that this course I
mean is about building computers.
Is just part of the computer science and
we are trying to help computer scientists.
To run their growth more efficiently,
whether we are, I mean our role is building
the computer systems or our role is as a
computer scientist and write the programs.
The second that that was the first reason.
The second reason is that as you can see,
this telescope can go deep into the sky.
But we see the travel.
We see the whole picture from
the Earth deep to the sky.
I want you to keep in mind that
we are going to do the same.
We are going to go deep
into the computer systems.
And we are trying to see what are the,
main elements,
or a small elements of the computer system.
And then we backtrack to a computer system.
So what I want from you is
that always keep in mind that.
Although we are trying to see what
are the basic or small elements of the
computer system at the end of the day,
we are the goal or the final target
is building a computer system
for computer scientists.
So sometimes you go deep into the
details we are trying to explain some,
I mean small elements of computer system and
we may lose the track of the whole picture.
So always keep in mind that all these
small elements gonna at the end of the
day gonna be used for computer system.
And the third reason.
Which is the startup. Today's lecture is.
What are the
Primitive problems that the people,
I mean human individuals during
the history wanted to solve.
So at the very beginning at the time
that the people could look at the
sky and they figure out these stars
they wanted to travel to these stars,
they wanted to explore the universe.
They wanted to know what are
the ingredients and etc.
So they start to formulate
something we call today problems.
Among the very few first problems
were I mean was
How to measure the distance?
Because they wanted to travel to
these stars to study these stars.
How to measure the height or how to
measure the length between two points?
As a result,
they try to solve these problems.
And today we know that among all these
problems, there are very few of them.
Can have a solution
So we're there.
I mean, in order to figure out
a problem has a solution or no,
and if there is a solution,
is it possible for us to reach that solution?
So first we have a problem.
Second,
we try to figure out whether
this problem has a solution.
Or it is called unsolvable?
The problem has no solution in math.
We can't prove that the
problem has no solution.
If we could prove that the
problem has a solution,
the next step is that trying
to find the solution.
Is it possible to reach
to this solution or no?
And this is the topic of a
it is called computability.
Whether we can compute this solution?
I mean the solution or no.
And all these things are topics
of these sciences theory.
Location of computer science.
If we know that we can
reach this solution,
the next step is.
Trying to, uh, I mean, take these steps,
some steps to reach the solution.
Very few of the problems?
Uh, their solution can be reachable
by taking some infinite steps.
We call them computable and
we start writing programs.
Basically, these programs are
those steps that we have to take
in order to reach the solution.
The collection of these steps is
called programs. That we have to.
I mean, I mean as a human or a machine
should take these steps to find a solution.
In computer science, if we want to
take these steps by a computer system.
The program has two main parts.
The first part is called algorithm,
which are basically those steps.
And also the data part.
The data part is how to represent
the input information about the
problem and when we take these steps
to analyze the input information
then we find the solution.
The next question is that how
to store the solution somewhere
again as a part of data.
So input information and the output
solution can be represented as data.
All the programs in order to reach the
solution for problem by a computer system.
As these two main parts.
As a result, you know that I mean
in computer science discipline.
If you are a computer science student
or also in computer engineering.
For each of these components of a program,
there are some courses that you have to take.
For data part you already took or
you have to take these courses.
Data structure basically discuss how
to represent information in memory.
But memory is a part of computer system.
In this course we are going
to build a memory.
The next is that how to represent the
information in a component that is
persistent even if we do not have a power.
We want to store the information
in a persistent way.
We call this file structure or file systems.
Then if there are huge amounts of
information and we have a lot of
users to access this information,
we have to build something called database.
There's a course called
database management system.
In this course you learn how to store
huge amounts of data in a persistent way,
and then we have data warehouse,
big data, and cloud.
These three are.
cloud based studies and today you
know that you have a Google Drive.
You have a,
I mean other cloud based
storage is that you can buy.
You can store your information in
the cloud on the Internet platform.
So these courses are all,
I mean dealing with how to
represent information.
Whether it's an input information
or output solution to a problem.
About the steps that we have to take
in order to reach the solution,
we call it algorithm.
These are the courses that you
have to take algorithm design.
How to design these steps to
reach the solution analysis of the
algorithm you have to prove that
these steps are actually gonna
help you to reach this solution.
What are the running time?
How many steps you have to take,
whether they are slow, fast and etc.
And later you can. Use the.
Human intelligence or animal intelligence.
To reach this solution,
which we call it artificial intelligence,
machine learning,
data mining.
These are again advanced topics
about providing some.
Steps to reach the solution.
So.
I'm going to just write a very
basic program to solve a very basic
solution as a problem, and gradually.
I'm going to explain why this course is
an essential course in order to write
an effective and efficient program
to reach the solution to a problem.
So in this course basically we are
going to use your prior knowledge
about programming, which is C program.
For writing  C program there are
a lot of I mean environment that
are helpful to write a C program.
The naive version of that
is the VI in Unix platforms.
Uh, if you take the system programming
course, you know how to write
a program in VI application.
But it's very naive, uh,
if you need more advanced
or more helpful environment,
there are a lot of other
environments versus code,
blog, Netbeans, Eclipse,
these two environment also for other
programming languages such as Java.
And etc so you can write C program
in any environment that you prefer.
You are interested in.
But I'm going to for the sake of our,
I mean this course as a sample environment
I'm going to use the eclipse environment,
but again, you're free to write
your C program in any environment.
But what I'm going to do is that I'm
going to create a very simple project
to solve a very simple problem.
So one thing is that in this
environment in this course.
Although we are writing C programs.
But I'm going to introduce
some new topics about C++.
Which is an extension to C program.
We don't program in C++,
we just see some of the advanced extent.
I mean,
explain some advanced extent of
the C program just to motivate
you that in later courses it's
good to move from C to C++.
But again,
our official language is C program.
That's why I use this C++ program project,
but I'm going to write code in C.
So I'm going to show you
how to use Eclipse to write.
I mean to create a project and to write
a program in C and how to build it.
These are the steps I'm going
to show you all these steps.
So when you create a project in C++
It creates these empty project for you.
But we have to write in C program.
So I'm going to create this empty C program
and I'm going to write just a program
that solves the addition problem just.
Adding two integer numbers,
you see that how basic this problem is,
but later you will see that even this
basic problem gonna have a lot of
complexities and in order to solve
these complexities we have to know.
How a computer system is built?
So I'm going to actually,
Stop this.
And open up the eclipse environment.
Again, you're free to use any.
Programming environment to do your
C programs. We have some labs,
so in these labs you have to do C programs,
but again, just to motivate you that C++
Is a better language or has some
features we are going to use C++ projects
but writing C programs
So in eclipse you have to just simply
do the new and then new project.
And then C ++ project.
And here, in order to have an
empty sample helloworld project,
you can simply select this
option Hello World and then,
this is the C++  compiler Cygwin.
And
Then we have to pick a name for that.
I just put a.
I mean addition program.
So this is a simple C++ program,
but we are going to use C language.
So in C language you can have a. Just let me.
Make it a little bit of.
Zoom.
OK, so. Editor. Control plus.
OK control plus.
OK, I hope you can see my screen now better.
OK, so. As you know,
in C program you have to have an entry
point which is the main function.
It can accept nothing and it returns
an integer and it can return zero.
This is the most simplest C program.
So I have to save it in Eclipse.
On this I mean hammer means that
building so you can build your program.
You can see that there is no error.
And then you can run your program.
so you can't in Eclipse.
These are just for Eclipse.
Depending on your coding environment,
you may have different options.
But the steps are the
same building and running,
so you have you have to select this
option local application and then
make it run and you see it just run
and prints out nothing and it's done.
So as I said, I'm going to,
I know that adding two integer
numbers has a solution.
And I know there is an algorithm for that
and I want to write a program to do that.
So basically you can simply write it.
Function at that except 2 integer numbers.
And basically return a + b. And,
We want user to input 2 numbers,
so let's define these numbers, integer #1,
integer #2 and then we have a another.
So these are the data part of my program,
so I need some storage is to
store the input information.
Also I need to store the
result as the sum variable so.
And then I have to ask the user
to input 2 integer numbers.
First number.
I believe all of you know all these commands.
And then the second number.
And then I'm going to print out the results.
So basically saying that this number
plus this number is equal to the
result and the variable for the output
string gonna be the first number.
The second number and the result
which is calling the function at.
I can make it simpler.
Let's say that a sum is equal to.
Number one and then #2.
So basically I use the function to
add 2 numbers and then I say that the
result of num1 plus num2 is sum.
And then I have to save it.
The main problem is that as
you can see here, I mean,
this environment says that there
is a problem with the scanner.
And printf, and the reason is
that I have to include a header
file that has these functions so.
This function is C is in the stereo.
Header file.
And then you see there is no error anymore.
You can build it. And then run it.
So here I can input for instance 10.
+2 and the result is 10 + 2 is 12.
Very simple question.
I mean a problem and these are the steps
to take in order to reach this solution.
So let's see what are the complexity.
I mean, let's add more complexity.
If I run the same program but this time for.
This I mean large number
plus another large number.
Again. It seems that it can't
find the sum of the large numbers.
So let's make it more.
I mean, having more large number,
for instance this number plus for
instance are another one, for instance.
Again, it seems it's working.
You see, I'm trying to add more
complexity into the input information,
so assuming I have again
this large number +1.
And this time you see that.
The first number,
although I input this large number,
seems that inside the memory of
the computer system the number
is stored differently.
I mean a negative number,
although I input a positive number.
And then when I plus one,
it ends up with an incorrect result.
So it seems that my solution is
not working for large numbers.
And in order to figure
out what is the problem,
I have to understand how the input
information are storing in a computer system.
So what's the problem?
Do you have any idea what's
the problem with this program?
So Wafi says that we have
to use the long integer.
Karan Deep says that the
error is a about out of range.
Cole says that outside of memory we have
to store the information outside the
memory because memory seems that it's not.
It doesn't have enough space
to store this large number.
Hai says that an overflow.
James says that overflows
for the integer variable.
So. You are right.
Basically we input a large input information.
It seems that the variable for
storing the integer number inside
this computer system is not large
enough to sort that large number,
but this knowledge is not about
computer science, it's about.
How it computer system is built?
You have this knowledge because you have
some sort of idea about how the memory works.
In this course we are going to
know exactly how the numbers are
represented in the computer system.
And how the memory stores the numbers?
And as a result,
it helps us to solve this problem.
So.
A solution to this problem is
that instead of relying on memory
elements to store this large number.
We can't store each digit of.
We can limit the input for
the user and we can say that.
We all we are only able to.
add, I mean to some extent,
to some,
to some extreme numbers.
So in order to hint to the user
that this program can only solve
some specific input numbers,
so in C.
There is a header file limits that edge.
Basically it shows the limits of the
memory spaces for each data type,
so you can simply say to the user that.
Please.
Enter 2 numbers between.
We are telling the user that this
program can solve only adding,
I mean a specific range of numbers
so we could hand the user about the
range of the integer number to input.
And the there are some constants in
the header file limits that shows the.
Maximum or minimum value for each data type.
For integer it is integer min and
get the minimum negative number
for an integer number and what's
the maximum positive number?
And then you can simply save it,
and this time at least the user knows.
What are the extreme values?
So I'm going to build it again.
And then run it.
So in Eclipse there is a bug as
you can see here the first command,
printf is not printed out.
And the reason is that again,
this is another reason behind the
behind the computer system.
That, you have some knowledge about it.
How the computer system is working.
In order to find this bug.
And in order to solve it.
Anybody of you know this part?
I mean no.
The reason why we don't see the output here.
Go ahead, Kevin.
Uh, do you have any guess why?
Although we say that print
out this statement but.
This environment doesn't show that.
Yes, Kevin says that I think
the output is being buffered.
Terrace says that. Maxim mean is
not defined if it is not defined.
It raises an error,
but it is already defined,
so we don't see any error.
We just do not see the
statement that we we saw.
I mean, we expect to see this statement.
Actually, Kevin is right,
the reason is that.
When you print out to the
standard console or any output,
a standard output device,
there is something called buffer.
So again, this knowledge comes from
how the computer system is working.
In not in this course,
but in the next, I mean.
In the computer architecture 2,
you know what is buffer and how the
buffer is helping to run a computer.
I mean a computer program.
So again, in order to just fix this problem.
You can ask the computer system,
do not buffer the output.
So the command in.
C program is set buff.
I can simply say that the standard output
shouldn't be buffered by passing all value.
So. Again.
This knowledge comes from how
a computer system is working.
It's not coming from computer science.
So let me build it again.
And then run it again.
You see,
this time you can see that this
statement is printed out and you
know in this computer system
my computer system what is the
minimum negative number and what
is the maximum positive number.
So one thing is I just wanted to see
what is the extreme positive value.
Plus one unit further.
As you can see here,
the maximum integer in this
computer system plus one.
It goes to. Minimum negative number.
So again, it gives us some
hints that maybe in memory.
If you pass the maximum rent,
it goes back to the minimum rent.
It's kind of a low, but again,
in order to figure out exactly happening,
we should know the internal
structure of the computer system.
So I just wanted to run it again and I
want to add the same number with two.
And again, you can see that this
is the minimum negative number +1.
So if you do not know how the number
is stored in the computer system,
you cannot solve this bug.
So basically you have to pass this
course to know what's going on behind
the scene in order to fix this bug. So.
I just wanted to show you
a program that solves the.
Adding two large numbers.
But a different approach,
so I'm going to outside.
This program that I'm going to
show you is in the C++ program,
so I'm going to.
Add a new project C++ project
Hello Award Cygwin and I'll
create a new project large.
Under addition.
And I just wanted you to.
Replace the template by this program.
So I borrowed this program from this
website and these are the authors.
So these are the authors of this program,
and this is from this website.
Before I explain this program,
I just wanted you to know that in
your labs or in any submission that
you have to write a C program,
you are free to use online codes.
You are free to ask for help from
your friend, but the main thing is
that you have to cite that website.
You have to cite your friends code and etc.
So if you do not do that,
it is an instance of plagiarism.
For academic integrity and you
are going to receive an alarm and
we do not mark your submission.
So always keep.
The credit of a piece of code that you are
using and it's a good I mean attitude to.
I mean, I mean thank those
who write the code and you.
I mean, just keep the credit.
So I'm going to.
Save this program and then build the program.
So this program is built again.
This program is in C++.
I'm not expecting you to
write the C++ program,
I just wanted to show you what is an
alternative solution to add to large numbers.
So again, this program, like our program,
has a function addition,
but this time instead of storing
the input in an integer variable,
it is stored in the input
variables as a string.
Basically,
this program wants to store each digit
of a program in a memory space in
order to address the overflow problem.
And then in this part.
It implements the actual algorithm
of addition that we learn from.
I mean primary school.
We know that I mean how to add 2
digits of two numbers and then we have
a carry and then we add this next.
I mean digits and etc.
So this piece of code basically
is implementing the algorithm
of adding two numbers which
we know from primary school.
And then let's run this program.
So for a small numbers.
Oh sorry.
Oh, this is not a program, I'm.
sorry about this. Let me just,
this is the another program. Wait a second.
Sorry about that. This is the program.
So I'm going to build it again.
And then run it.
So for a small numbers 2 + 3
it returns 5 and this is the
running time of the addition,
so let's try it for large numbers.
For instance, this huge number
plus another huge number.
And you see that it can do the
addition, and this is the sum.
You can try. I mean very large numbers
like this, plus for instance 1.
And as you can see, this large number +1.
I mean resulted in this large number.
And this is the running time.
It is so fast.
So basically this program can solve the
problem by another storing the numbers in
an integer variable inside the memory.
But instead the store each
digit in a memory element.
So just to add more
complexity to this program.
I just wanted to add very large numbers.
That basically increased its running time.
And see that if I add
very very large numbers.
There is a problem with
running of this program or no.
So in order to do that, uh,
that was the first program that I.
Showed you.
This is the program that adds large numbers,
but instead of just one time it does,
for instance 100 times or 200 times.
Just to see that if I want to
do it addition multiple times,
which is happening when we are doing
for instance calculation by matrix,
I just want to see that the
running time is a problem or no.
So if I build this program.
And then run it.
So. Assuming that I have this large
number plus this large number.
And I want to add these two numbers,
for instance 200 times.
You see that it's still sometimes if I.
This program actually logs the running time.
If I add these two numbers just one time,
if I add these two numbers two times and etc.
As you can see here,
even if I increase the number of times two,
I mean even 100 times or two
200 times is still it is zero.
Let's put more stress on this program.
So how can I put more stress just to check?
Is there any problem with the running time?
I can increase the input numbers and
also I can increase the iteration.
So in order to do that. I already created a.
Large very very large number.
So let me show you that large number.
I create a number with 50,000 digits.
And this is the number.
This is the number that has 50,000 digits.
All the digits are 9.
I want to add this number.
With itself multiple times
and see the running time.
So in order to do that, basically.
Let me clear this one. So this I have to.
Find the.
Executable of my program,
so the executable if you want to see what
is the exact program which is running,
you can in Eclipse you can find it here.
So I want to run this program,
but by inputting that huge number.
So inside the eclipse I
cannot do that, that's it.
I mean problem with Eclipse but inside the.
Command prompt I can do that.
So I just wanted to find.
This program.
This is my program. I wrote
It is inside the default folder.
And that's the program that I'm looking for.
So just again 2 + 3.
10 times and it shows the running time.
Now I want to run the same program.
At this time, for that huge number.
It's huge numbers, so basically I'll
select all of these digits. Control C,
copy them and then I paste them here.
So this is the first number.
And the second number I'm going
to paste the same number again
and this is the second number.
And then I just simply press
the enter and I want to do
this calculation 100 times.
So you see that now the running time
is increasing. And at some point.
It takes some second for calculating,
I mean adding to these two
large number 100 times.
So if I have a matrix that has
elements of these large numbers and the
matrix has for instance 1000 numbers,
so let's run this program again.
For this large number.
Plus this large number,
and assuming that we have a
matrix of 1000 elements,
which is very uncommon in rendering graphics.
So my computer is a powerful computer.
It's a, I mean a Intel Zeon so you see that.
Up until I mean 150 hundred 200,
it is still fast to return.
Uh, this number of addition,
but you see that.
When it's reaching 200 times.
And more is still.
It needs more time to do the calculation.
So why I'm explaining this?
The reason is that if I know the built
in structure of a computer system.
I may come up with more efficient
program that does this huge number
of calculations much more faster.
I may end up with a program that does
the 1000 calculation in just one second.
If we don't know the knowledge of the
computer system as a computer scientist,
we can write this.
I mean naive program,
which takes a lot of time to do
that large amount of calculation.
But if we know how the internal structure
of the computer system is working,
I may come up with a better program and
such that even for this large calculation
it does the work much more faster.
So I'm going to stop this,
you see.
If it goes up, it is still,
I mean much slower.
It's getting slower and slower.
I just wanted to stop this.
So let's back to these slides.
So in these slides,
whatever I did.
These are the explanation of
the things that I showed you,
but let's go back to.
This one. I thought the running time.
Of adding large numbers from one time,
two time up until 1000 times the same
program that I showed you right now,
and I plugged the running time
and you see that when the number
of addition is increasing,
the running time is increasing linearly.
However, as I said,
if we know the internal structure
of the current system,
we may come up with a better
program that grows. I mean,
the running time grows but not linearly,
but for instance in logarithmic way
or even I mean much less running time.
So. Any questions so far?
The feedback here.
Any question?
Uh. I will explain about
the logistics. Of course.
I mean about the labs and etc.
I mean, at the end of today's lecture.
But short answer is no.
Not this week the labs are start next week.
Yes I will. I'm in post to start
but I mean my questions.
Questions about the topics that
I'm explaining about the course.
I will explain, I mean in few next slides.
So.
OK, go ahead Maria. So what's the question?
Ah. Oh, the set buffer again.
The short answer is that setting the
buffer off mean that, so let me back to.
The program here.
It means that it turn off the buffering,
so you would ask me what is
buffering and I will tell you that.
This course and the next course is
going to explain what is a buffer.
So this is a good question if
you do not pass this course
about the computer system and
you just want to write a program,
you won't know what is the problem
and what is the buffer.
So that's a great question.
In order to see the answer you
have to pass this course and then
you have to know the internal
structure of the control system
to understand what is a buffer.
So the short answer is that
internal structure of a computer
system in order to work faster.
Basically it, uh,
instead of just outputting the
each character into the monitor or
into the output, uh, I mean device?
It waits up until a certain amount
of characters are available and
then goes to output the characters.
And this is because of the efficiency.
So if you want to output something in
the output device such as monitor,
if you do it character by character,
it takes a lot of.
Time for the computer system
to output each character.
What happens is that the computer
system waits up until, for instance,
1000 characters is in the buffer and
then in one round it outputs the character.
So again,
this is knowledge which is coming
from the computer system,
not from computer science.
That's the way that buffering is working.
About the Bilal says that
while we create C++ project.
Although we are writing C programs,
the reason is that sometimes we want you to.
I mean, we want to encourage you to
see the advanced feature of the C++ and
compare it with C program and see that
sometimes doing a statement or doing
a program in C language is very hard.
But in C++  it is very easy.
It's a kind of transitional way for you
to later decide. And move on to the C++.
So it's kind of I mean just.
A good. Practice to start for you
to move into the C++.
Although you can create a C project
or A to write your C program,
it's just motivation.
OK. So.
As you can see in this program,
although I mean you can see that.
In, I mean accepting the input numbers
and printing out the result and
doing the calculation. It is in C++,
which is much more easier if you do.
If you want to do the same in C,
it's become very challenging.
I will upload these codes for
you so you can run it at home
and study these piece of codes.
I mean, uhm, I mean thoroughly at home.
But the main idea behind.
These parts of the code
that I explained was that.
It is good for you or sometimes
it is essential for you to know.
What is the internal structure of?
Computer system.
Because at the end of the day,
your program gonna run on top of a machine.
And if you know the built in
the structure of a machine,
it may help you to write a better.
Program and it may help you to write to know.
Uh, what is the problem with
storing the information?
Basically large information.
So. As a result, in computer science
not only we have disciplines about data.
Not only we have disciplines about algorithm,
we also have disciplines or we
have courses about knowing the
building structure of the machine.
The first one is this course and then you
will have to continue this course with
the next course computer architecture.
And then if you are interested,
there are some optional courses such
as micro processing programming to
know more about the internal structure.
Of a computer system.
So all I was trying to say is that.
You have to know these topics in order
to come up with a better program.
So, and this is our course.
And. This course has.
I mean, if you want to pass this
course and know the building
structure of the computer system,
the path is this. First we explain.
How the information is
represented by numbers.
Any type of information,
whether it's an image,
whether it's the audio signal,
whether it's a number,
any information in a computer
system must be mapped to a number.
And represented by numbering system.
So we explain how this happens.
Among all numbering systems, we explain
that we use the binary number system.
We explain what's the advantage
and why we do this.
After knowing how to represent information,
any type of information in binary system.
We explain how to analyze these information.
So we built the basic elements of the
computer system, which is an end gate.
We add more gates.
For instance, we add or gates.
We have not gate.
We call these basic element gates.
That does very basic primitive operations.
For instance, for the end.
Basically it can just if you have zero
and with zero the result gonna be 0.
01 the result going to be 010 going
to be zero and one one gonna be 1.
You see how primitive the
operation is with the and gate.
We explain these primitive gates
and primitive operation and
then we attach these very small
elements to build larger elements.
We call these larger elements
combinational logic because they are
combinations of these basic elements.
And then by
Building large elements we expect to
calculate more complex operations,
so we then build larger elements
to do addition to do subtraction,
to do division, to do multiplication. Why?
Just these basic operations and or not.
Then we continue with flip flops.
Why?
Because at some point we need to
store the information we need to
restore the input information and
we need to store the output result.
For instance,
if the input information is 2 and +2,
and the output Result is 4,
we need to store 2 these two and
then we need to store the result.
How can we store the information?
These are the basic elements of storing
the information inside the computer system.
Is called flip flops.
These elements can store only one bit of
information where they're zero or one.
You see how primitive this element is,
and then we again put these basic elements
together to store larger information.
We call this sequential logic,
but then we can store larger bits.
For instance this number 4.
This is the number 4.
For the integer #4 and for instance,
this is the A integer
number at binary number 47.
So by attaching these basic
elements of flip flops,
we are able to store larger
numbers and then we figure out
how the information is actually
stored inside the computer system.
How we can know what's the
problem with the I mean overflow
and when the overflow happens?
And at the end of the day,
by passing this course which we call,
we can call it digital Odyssey.
We are building from very primitive elements.
Such as, I mean, as I said and or.
Two very sophisticated elements.
So I borrowed this slide from
the movie 2001 a space odyssey.
By Stanley Kubrick.
I'm a fan of movie.
Uh, so I use a lot of movie
references in my slides.
So in this movie.
The plot is that how the human technology?
Evolved have been evolving
through the history.
How we as a human species could build.
Sophisticated systems such as
space craft by very primitive elements,
such as a bone of I mean.
Say animal.
So we are going to do the same in this
course from a very primitive elements.
We are going to build a computer system.
In this trip.
At any moment I want you to keep the I
mean keep in mind the whole picture.
So sometimes we are dealing with very
detailed of the primitive elements,
but at the end of the day you
have to be careful that we are
building these primitive elements
to build a larger sophisticated.
And if you're ready.
We can start, of course.
Any questions so far?
There is no question or you may
not have attention to this slide.
OK, there is no question from Ming,
so just to make sure that all
of you has the attention,
let me know that you have.
I mean you can send some feedback.
I mean emoji icons.
Just to show how you feel so far.
So since everybody has their attention
and all, so far so good, OK?
So if you want to pass this
journey or odyssey with me,
this is the logistic. Uhm?
The logistic in this course is that.
We are going to have a. I mean some labs.
The labs are programming assignments.
You have to do these labs by.
I mean writing C programs.
We have 10 labs, each lab are gonna have a,
I mean a manual.
In the manual I'll explain,
uh, I put some sample code.
I explain what is the main idea
behind the lab and then at the
end of the lab I explained what
is the task that you have to do.
I will show you a sample lab.
But in total you're gonna have 20%
of the whole mark from the labs.
Also, we have some lecture assignment.
We call them lek.
So we have labs we have lecs.
The lecture assignments, or Lecs are
Basically some questions that
you have to solve in a paper.
These are problem solving questions.
Whether it's a mathematical
question or it's just.
I mean it needs some thinking
to solve the problem,
so there is no programming or
hands on programming involved
in these type of assignments.
In total you gonna have a 20% from that.
Again,
I will show you a sample lecture assignment.
And then, uh.
We have a discussion board.
In this discussion board,
you can,
uh,
put your questions or any new idea
or any interesting idea for all
other students by participating
to the discussion board,
you're gonna have 5% bonus point.
For instance,
based on my experience,
most of the students send me email
and have some question about programs.
I highly encourage you to send your
questions in the discussion board and
I will answer your questions there.
And the reason is that it might be
the question from other students the
same question and also other students
can benefit from the same answer.
Also,
there are some students that no
programming much better than me or they
could solve the problem much faster than me,
so it's an opportunity for
other students to help other.
I mean each other and collect bonus points.
So if you send me an email,
I would ask you to send your
question in the discussion board
and I will answer you there.
Unless it's a privacy issue or
unless it's just a personal I
mean question and you want just
to discuss it in private with me.
Also,
we have two paper exam,
a midterm exam 30% final exam 30%.
I will explain the date and when
we approach to the exam date I
will post some sample questions.
So you know the you will know the
format and some sample questions.
I will right now start explain what
are the elements of the course.
I how can you see the how can you
submit your submissions and etc.
So I will give you a blackboard tour.
This tour has these elements.
I will explain what are the learning outcome
and how can you find the file for that.
What are the course syllabus?
This is a very important document between me.
It's kind of contract between
me and you as a student.
All parts of this course going
to be according to this syllabus.
I will explain about the labs
and our lab instructors,
so we have two lab instructors, Zara.
For morning laps on Tuesday or Thursdays.
Andrew knock for the afternoon
labs the same day, Tuesday,
Thursday by in the afternoon,
right after today's I mean lecture.
I mean our course lectures.
I will explain what are
the lecture assignments.
I will explain what are the lab
assignments and what are the requirements.
And also I will explain.
Where is the lab, whether it's a
virtual lab room or on campus lab room.
And, uh, I will show you some.
A thread in the discussion board.
And how can you participate
in the discussion board?
And before I go to the Blackboard tour.
This is the information about me.
I'm Hussain. Your instructor in this course.
On campus you can find me in
this building Lambton tower.
This is my room number.
Also I'm available in the virtual
office hour inside the blackboard.
I will show you that link.
If you have any.
Question any issue related to the course?
Simply send me an email to this email.
I will reply to you.
I try my best to reply.
Less than five minutes.
At least I will reply to you
and I may give you the result.
I mean the the correct answers
some time later.
But again, uh,
the best way is that for general questions.
When there is no privacy concern, Simply
put your question in the discussion board.
Not only collected bonus points,
but also I can share the answer
for all other students.
In my personal life,
I'm highly interested in extreme sports.
I'm, uh, uh, I love swimming and.
I do biking every day.
And, uh.
Actually I sports.
It's kind of 70% of my whole lifestyle is.
Sport.
And about the office hour, uh,
you can attend again on my office on campus.
Also individual office hour
right after the class,
one hour from 11:30 up until 12:30.
And right now I'm going to go
to our Blackboard tour.
This is very important part of.
For you, because, uh.
There's some important information
about the logistics of the course.
And sometimes some student misses
some part and they lose the marks so
I want you to keep full attention.
To the explanation from now on so.
In the list of the courses you have,
you can find this course at this
link computer architecture 1.
2022 winter If you see this banner.
It means that you are in
the correct home page.
If you want to read more about this banner,
you can find more in these two links.
Which is very related.
I mean kind of artistic thought of.
I mean computer system elements.
For instance, this is the end gate.
This is sorry,
this is the end gate.
This is the old gate and this
is the not gate.
This is the home page.
We have a link in the left side.
Weekly schedule. This is for us.
Let me go to this to give you.
This is for us to keep track of the
timeline within the 13 weeks of lectures.
So this is just an image.
If you want to zoom in and
see better, you have to.
I mean open this Excel file.
So let me open it for you.
So in the first sheet for students.
This is the weekly schedule on Mondays
morning on Monday morning at 4:00 AM.
So keep in mind 4:00 AM
in the morning of Mondays.
I will release the manuals whether it's
for labs or for the lecture assignments.
Also. If a the due date is for
releasing the mark of your submissions,
it will be on Monday mornings.
I highly encourage you to check
your markings of your submissions.
Right after releasing the marks
on Monday mornings and do not
wait up until for instance,
two or three weeks after the
release of the grade last semester,
I had some student that they asked
me about the marks at the end
of the semester for some marks.
For lab I mean for lab two or three.
I mean, I mean, early weeks of the semester,
so do not wait up until late.
I mean end of the semester to ask
question about your mark or review
your marks of the submissions.
So right away after releasing the marks.
Check your Marks and if you want to review
your marks, contact your lab instructor.
I will explain more about that.
On Tuesday and Thursday, we have the core
lectures A on Tuesday and Thursday B
This is going to be hyflex.
so I mean since February we're gonna
have on campus classes and also online.
Right after the lectures I will be in
the office for your I mean questions.
Also we have the morning labs by Zahra.
After the morning labs we have the labs by
ronak. Keep in mind you're a lab section.
You have to add attendees lab based
on the lab section that you register.
So the morning labs are 51 and 52.
The afternoon laps are 53 and 54.
It should be 54. That's a typo. Uhm?
The deadline for submissions are each
week on Wednesday morning at 4:00 AM.
Again, this is in the morning,
so 4:00 AM I had some student last
semester that they thought that
it's in the afternoon 4:00 PM,
but not it is in the morning
Wednesday in the morning 4:00 AM.
But I highly suggest you do not
wait up until last minutes.
I will suggest you to submit the
submission midnight but I just add more
hours for those that are not living in
Canada or they are connecting online
because of the time zone difference.
These times are all based on Eastern
Time in Canada, so I mean in Ontario.
But I mean again 4:00 AM.
About the I mean extension.
During the week weeks of lectures.
So these are this is our plan.
On week zero we don't have any lab.
We don't have any lecture assignment.
But we have the classes and office
hours from next week the second week.
We have the labs up in the blackboard.
Also, the lab's gonna be started.
You have to attend the lab room.
Uh, the attendance is optional,
but I highly suggest you to attend the labs.
In these labs,
the lab instructor is going to help you to
write the programs or to solve the questions,
but they are not going to give
you the answer final answer.
And then.
For each lab,
the submission that line
is next week Wednesday.
So in the week two you have the
lab 2 and lecture 2 next week,
on Wednesday you have the
submission for that.
One thing about the number of
the labs I'm in the index for the
labs is that these numbers are
according to the week number.
So in week two we have Lab 2.
In week three we have Lab 3.
So in the first week we don't have any lab,
so we don't have any lab one.
So as you can see here,
in the week four we have Lab 4 and
then the next week we have the
submission for Lab four and etc.
The only exception is the reading week,
which is on the Week 6.
On reading which there is no
lab or there is no letter,
there is no submission.
As a result,
the labs were week five is a two week lab.
Also the lecture.
So the submission for week
five is 2 week submission.
You have to submit it the
week after the reading week.
Right after the reading week
we have the midterm exam,
so the first Tuesday after the
reading week we have a midterm.
And up until as you can see here,
up until the last week which is.
Week 13 this is our last week of lectures.
And. One week after that,
although we don't have any lecture,
I will be available on the office for your.
I mean any issue or any
question throughout the course.
And as you can see here on the last week,
week 13 we don't have any lab too neither.
The last lab gonna be on the week 12.
We have lab 12 and then next
week Wednesday you gonna submit
your last lab and lecture.
So this is the whole timeline.
I leave it to you to study this timeline.
But this is a very good,
uh, I mean indicator.
For your I mean plant time plan.
The next is the announcement.
Whenever we release the mark or
release the labs or whatever
happening regarding to this course,
I'm going to make an announcement.
The next part is about the lecture.
Anything regarding the lecture,
the learning outcome.
There's a PDF file.
Is successful a student after
passing this course has disabilities.
How the internal structure
of the computer works?
What are the building elements and etc.
So I leave it to you to study this document.
And then the next is the syllabus.
This is a very important
document course syllabus.
This is a contract between me and you.
As I said, everything is gonna
be according to this document.
Information about myself.
The office hour.
These are the lab sections.
I repeat the learning outcome
in this document, so, uh,
these are the same information.
The reference book for this course is this
course a digital design by a morris mano.
You can find this book in campus library.
Also, it is a.
Uhm?
Part of it is available online.
About, uh, but one thing is that, uh, for?
I mean the question is or I mean the
topics that we are going to cover.
I'm going to cover all these
from the book so. Honestly,
you don't need to buy the book.
Everything is gonna be clear.
I mean covered in the lectures.
The evaluation, as I said,
20% lab assignment lecture assignment
20% lab assignment 30 for midterm,
30 for final and 5% for discussion.
These are the topics that we are
going to cover, not make system.
How the arithmetic operation is
done building the logic gates.
And then put these logic gates
to have larger units off a
computer system memory units.
And then finally we are going to explain.
How the memory is working
inside the computer system?
How a processor is working and then for
advanced topics I leave you for the next.
I mean cores, computer architecture 2.
So there are more information.
The passing course is 50% and I'm
going to round up your final marks.
And more information here.
You can read in this document.
This link the lectures are in this link.
Uh, I will post the slides and
the recordings for each week. Uh,
I'm going to create a folder, for instance,
for the first week we have the lecture 01.
Because we have two lectures in each week,
we have lecture A&B.
For each one I will create a link.
And, uh, I will upload this slide
and the recording in these links.
In order to attend the class,
we have to use this link classroom.
So you already know how to do
that because you are in the class.
And then the exam.
So so far we don't have any exam at the
time of the exam or we'll upload the.
Sample questions and the format
how the exam gonna be and etc. So.
And then the next part is about
the labs and the submissions.
Lab syllabus is a document.
Basically anything that you have
to be careful,
for instance a.
You have to be careful that from
5:00 to 6:00 AM the blackboard
gonna be off so you cannot submit
anything during this period of time.
Although all the submissions are
before this time, so 4:00 AM.
So I'm going to open this document,
but these are the main important
part of this document.
So in this document you know the
information about the lab instructors.
You know the information about the markers,
who markers submissions.
Manush gonna be our media guide.
Posted recordings in the blackboard.
Kelvin will be our help for
HYFLEX on campus classes.
These are the labs.
As you can see here,
these are the title of the labs.
We have 10 laps.
There is no lap in the first week.
There is no lab in reading book and
there is no lap in the last week.
The labs on campus is in this room.
In this room and also you can
join through the Blackboard link.
How? As you can see here,
there's a link here lab room,
so if you click on the on that.
You can see here there are some lab
section based on your lab section.
You have to click on that link and
then enter for that day for instance.
This is for.
Where's the lab for?
Oh, this is the first one.
There is no lab.
This is next week.
lap in the morning.
You have to use this link
to enter the online lab.
One thing is very important is
that late submission receives 0.
There is no accommodation if you.
Uh, submit even just one
minute after the deadline,
you won't receive anymore, you receive 0.
If there are some problems,
you have to provide some evidence.
For instance, if you don't have any
Internet or your Internet issue,
etc, you have to provide evidence.
Uh, in order to have an extension or a,
I mean offer an exception.
An important thing here is this.
Anything regarding to the submissions,
whether it's a lecture
submission or lab submission,
anything related to submission.
Whether you want to have a new attempt,
whether you want to review your marking.
Whether you want to ask for an
exception or whether whatever.
You have to communicate with
your lab instructor first.
They know you, they know your history,
they know who marks your
submissions and they can help you.
If your problem or your
question is not resolved,
then communicate with me.
So this is very important if you
right away send me an email I will
redirect you to your lab instructor.
So keep that in mind.
Anything regarding to the submissions.
First of all,
communicate with your lab
instructor based on the lab
number that you registered.
The lab's gonna be put in
this folder for each lab.
We have a folder.
So there is a helpful link how to.
Attendee lab online. For instance,
this is the lab for next week lab two.
There is a manual for that.
And if the lab instructor records the labs,
you can find the recording in this folder.
So this is an example of the lab manual.
As I told you we mentioned the due date
for the submission and the release date.
Or marks for the lab submission.
We have some step for you to follow.
It's a helpful steps for you to.
Uh, do the lab.
Usually the 1st and 2nd step is done
by the lab manual just to help you.
The last step is your task,
and the last step I explain
what is the requirement for you
and how you submit your lab.
If you do not follow the naming or the
file structure or etc, you will lose Mark.
As you can see here.
For this first lab, which is in this lab 2.
You have to submit a very
simple program and these are the
elements of your submission.
Read more about these parts
of their submission.
And and this is the marking breakdown.
About the lectures of
missions are the lectures.
Submissions are inside the lectures.
Uhm? For instance,
the lecture submission 2 going
to be in the folder Lecture 2,
which is going to be next week.
But as sample I can I can show
you a sample lecture submission
from the last semester.
For instance, this is the
assignment for the second week.
Again, very similar.
The due date, the release date
and these are the questions.
So the question is, are we may post,
for instance 10 questions or more than that,
but you have the option to
only answer two of them.
It is based on your preference.
Sometimes I will say at
for instance question #5 or 6.
Sometimes I leave it to
you for your preference.
The other questions are
for you for your reference,
because in the mid term and final
exam the question is gonna be very
similar to these type of questions.
And, uh.
You can find your grades in this part.
For instance, for lab two,
we can see your marks.
We asked the markers to put the
reason behind the deductions,
so for each question of your submission
you know why you lose the mark.
And the discussion board the
last part is that these are the
threats in the discussion board.
Anything regarding the lectures.
You can post your questions
here in the labs or etc.
The lab structures and myself
will monitor the discussion board
and will answer your issues right
away in the discussion board.
Also, you can collect bonus point.
The office.
You can attend the online
office as you can see here,
office hour for today.
You can attend at 11:30 right
after this class at the office
by using this link.
That's it so.
Anything else I'm ready to answer
your questions. Sorry about.
I mean we are five minutes after the class,
but I'm ready to take your question.
And I will be also in the office
for further questions if you have.
OK. Thank you for attending Karandeep.
Thank you Sina. Thank you Chang.
Have a great day guys.
Thank you. thierry and cole
So seems everything is clear a
let me see is whether there is a
question at Tim asks whether the
exams are online or in person.
I will explain about the format of the
exam when we get close to the date.
But it is online a for short
answer it is online.
For those inside the class,
it's also going to be online,
so but they can attend the class and
submit the answers on class in the class,
but it is going to be online.
Yes, all the submissions are due on
Wednesday 4:00 AM. In the morning.
And if any other question?
Yes, uh, attending the on
campus classes again, optional.
So you can use the online link
to attend the class online,
so it's not mandatory for those that who
register on campus to be in the class.
It is, I mean optional to use
the on campus or online link.
To attend the class.
And the delivery of the
topics are all the same.
OK, so. If there is no
question I have to ask though,
I mean to leave the class because
I have to close the virtual class.
The door of the virtual class,
so have a great day guys
and see you on Thursday.
You too advanced have a great day.
Angelo Anna Eva Javi Himaswin
mark and Nafeez if you don't mind.
I'm going to remove you from.
The class, so I then I can close
the class. So I have this.